#+TITLE: Willett Time
#+PROPERTY: header-args:js :eval no
#+OPTIONS: toc:nil
#+HTML_HEAD: <script src="../js/willett-time/clock.js" type="text/javascript"></script>

#+BEGIN_EXPORT html
<svg id="willet_clock2"
     class="svg-clock"
     width="481"
     height="565">
  <image xlink:href="../assets/willett-time/clock-face-blank-no-pendulum.png"
         width="100%"
         height="100%"
         id="bg-img"/>
    <g id="hands">
      <image xlink:href="../assets/willett-time/hour-hand.png" id="grandfather_hour_hand" class="hour_hand" x="404" y="240" width="14" height="34.45" />
      <image xlink:href="../assets/willett-time/minute-hand.png" id="grandfather_min_hand" class="min_hand" x="404" y="190" width="19" height="65" />
      <line id="grandfather_sec_hand" class="sec_hand" x1="405" y1="205" x2="405" y2="275"/>
    </g>
    <image xlink:href="../assets/willett-time/pendulum.png" id="pendulum" x="362" y="379" width="100" height="120" />
</svg>
<p id="grandfather_text">00:00:00</p>
#+END_EXPORT


This is a story about change in complex systems.

* Prologue
#+BEGIN_QUOTE
And God said, Let there be light: and there was light.
And God saw the light, that it was good: and God divided the light from the darkness.
And God called the light Day, and the darkness he called Night. And the evening and the morning were the first day.

-- Genesis 1:3-5
#+END_QUOTE

I used to work with an ex-military guy in Amazon Logistics named
Ron. Ron had little patience for what he (rightly) viewed as needless
complexity introduced by "the coders."

Once, Ron asked for an export of some truck schedules, so I crafted a
quick SQL query and sent him the results in a .csv file. A few minutes
later he came to my desk to ask about the weird number in the
"datetime" column.

"Ah, right - that's just epoch time," I explained.

"Epic time."

"Right, epoch. It's a... well, it's like, how our machines represent
time. It's the number of seconds since January 1, 1970."

Ron's blank stare afforded me a few seconds to reflect on how stupid
this idea sounds to a non-Unix user. "Oh, of course," he said
finally. "1970 - when the world began."

* Act I: George Vernon Hudson

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
Although adopting Mr. Meyrick's system in the present work I do not
agree unreservedly with all his conclusions; but I have not attempted
to alter his system in accordance with my own views, as I conceive
that the conclusions of a naturalist, who has only had the opportunity
of studying a restricted fauna, would necessarily be liable to
considerable error.

-- George Vernon Hudson, New Zealand Moths and Butterflies (1898)
#+END_QUOTE

If we can tell our MacBooks that the dawn of time was during the Nixon
administration, who's to stop us from choosing the hour of sunset?

Nobody, if you ask George Vernon Hudson. You can't actually ask him
because he's been dead for a long time according to any clock you
fancy, but I'm confident he would agree.

George was a man of simple pleasures. When he clocked out of the post
office in Wellington, New Zealand, he pursued one his two passions:
bugs and stars. As any entomologist will tell you (I'm assuming - no
entomologists were consulted), the daylight hours are primetime for
spotting sweet insects.

Being a father and the family's breadwinner, GVH pursued his hobbies
like most parents with a 9-5 job: he snuck in an hour or two of
star-gazing before bed and relegated his bug-hunting expeditions to
the weekends while the kids were at soccer practice.

Pscyhe! That's not how you amass "the finest and most perfect
collection of New Zealand insects ever formed by any one person."[fn:1]

Instead, he drafted the first formal proposal for seasonal time: on
midnight of October 1st, the clock would spring forward to 2 am
(remember, October is spring in the Southern hemisphere), and at 2 am
on March 1st the clock would fall back to midnight. The effect would
be to create two extra hours of daylight in the summer evenings for
"cricket, gardening, cycling, or any other outdoor pursuit
desired" [fn:2] (e.g., chasing butterflies).

In 1895 he presented his paper "On Seasonal Time-adjustment in
Countries South of Lat. 30°" before his scientifically-minded peers in
the Wellington Philosophical Society. It didn't get the reception he
was hoping for. In fact, it was so roundly scorned that the Society
didn't even bother to publish it in their proceedings.

Their secretary did, however, record the reaction of Mr. Harding, who
called the scheme a "wholly unscientific and impracticable" rehash of
an idea that Benjamin Franklin had more than a century earlier.

Mr. Travers concurred. "It was out of the question to think of
altering a system that had been in use for thousands of years, and
found by experience to be the best. The paper was not practical."

Mr. Hustwick, who would have fit right into moderate White America
during the Civil Rights Movement, "was of opinion that the reform
spoken of would have to wait a little longer." Translation: fantastic
idea, George, old sport! I'll be 100% behind you just as soon as I'm
dead enough not to be inconvenienced.

Mr. Richardson voiced a sort of non-sensical support; he thought it
"would be a good thing if the plan could be applied to the young
people." Lest the partitioning of time into Old Fart and
Whippersnapper Standard Time create confusion, Mr. Travers proposed
that each clock have two sets of hands.

Mr. Hawthorne's response is my favorite. He "did not see any
difficulty in carrying out the views advocated so ably by Mr. Hudson."
(Ha. Spoken like a man who's never been oncall during a daylight
savings transition.)

GVH was understandably hurt by the criticism, Mr. Hawthorne's naïve
optimism aside. He "said that he was sorry to see the paper treated
rather with ridicule. He intended it to be practical."[fn:3]

His proposal for seasonal time adjustment might have amounted to
nothing more than a footnote on the Wikipedia page of the guy with the
biggest bug collection in New Zealand had Hudson's paper not somehow
wound up several hundred kilometers and a ferry ride away in the hands
of an anonymous True Believer. Sometime during 1896 (so at least 3
months after Hudson's presentation in October), someone in
Christchurch, New Zealand read Hudson's presentation and found it so
inspiring that they re-printed it and distributed thousands of copies
around town.

Emboldened (and surprised) by the grassroots support, GVH returned to
the Wellington Philosophical Society in 1898, 3 years after his first
presentation. To the Mr. Maskell's of the world who believed that "the
mere calling the hours different would not make any difference in the
time," GVH responded that "time is merely an artificial standard,
which might be further adjusted if by so doing it could be made more
subservient to our requirements."

He then proceeded to refute the most common objections to seasonal
time: no, his proposal wouldn't deprive people of long winter
evenings, because the clocks would only be altered during the summer
(Did you even read the paper?); yes, the same effect could be achieved
without altering the clocks if everyone agreed to wake up at 5:00
instead of 6:00 and to show up for the noon train at 11:00, but
enforcing such a policy would be impossible; yes, the milkman would
have to start his route in the dark, and yes, the kerosene and theater
industry stood to lose some money, but they would be compensated for
their loss of wealth with a corresponding increase in health. [fn:2]

No one seems to have been particularly enthused by his second speech,
but at least this time the Society deemed it worthy of publication in
their proceedings.

Sir James Hector worried that it would be hard to wake up his boys up
in the morning. "There would also," he fancied, "be some trouble in
getting their domestic helpers to appreciate the change." "Mr. Hudson
briefly replied," according to the official meeting minutes, and then
they moved on to discussing James Hector's lizard collection. [fn:4]

And that was pretty much the end of George Vernon Hudson's campaign
for seasonal time.

* Act II: William Willett

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
"Nevertheless, she persisted."

-- Senate Majority Leader, Mitch McConnell
#+END_QUOTE

The campaign for seasonal time languished for the next 9 years until
it found a new champion: William Willett.

While riding his horse one summer morning in Pett's Wood (because what
else would a man named "William Willett" be doing on a summer morning
other than riding his horse in "Pett's Wood?"), he noticed that his
neighbors' blinds were still drawn against the sun. This waste of
daylight inspired Willett to write a pamphlet titled "The Waste of
Daylight," in which he proposed his own version of seasonal time.

He called for a series of 4 adjustments of 20 minutes forward each
spring and another 4 adjustments of 20 minutes back in the fall. This
promised less disruption to human biorythms than the 2 adjustments of
2 hours each proposed by GVH, but at the cost of 6(!) additional clock
adjustments per year. [fn:5]

There's no evidence that Willett was aware of Hudson's campaign for
seasonal time, but his pamphlet did echo many of Hudson's talking
points: seasonal time would reduce the demand for artifical lighting,
afford more leisure time, and no, it wouldn't be prohibitively
difficult to implement.

The content was familiar, but the rhetorical style wasn't.

GVH deployed a measured appeal to logic with a cheerful brand of
pathos thrown in for good measure: wouldn't it be nice if we had more
time for nature walks?

Willett, on the other hand, rallied his readers for an assault
on... disease, or something. [fn:5]

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
Light is one of the great gifts of the Creator. While daylight
surrounds us, cheerfulness reigns, anxieties press less heavily, and
courage is bred for the struggle of life. Against our ever-besieging
enemy, disease, light and fresh air act as guards in our defence, and
when the conflict is close, supply us with most effective weapons with
which to overcome the invader.
#+END_QUOTE

The martial metaphor was probably less jarring to Willett's
contemporaries than it sounds to us, out of context. If Europe in the
early 1900's was a house party, Germany would be that guy who parks
himself by the keg and gets louder and more aggressive in his
proclamations of naval superiority as the night wears on (it's been a
while since I've been to a house party). Things got particularly tense
in 1908 when Germany's old pal Austria-Hungary decided that
"Austria-Hungary-Bosnia-Herzegovina" had a nice ring to it and
formally annexed Bosnia and Herzegovina without really
asking. [fn:6] [fn:7]

In Willett's rhetorical universe, malevolent hordes of pathogens and
Huns lurked outside the gate, presumably waiting for an early sunset
to attack the defenseless British public. Unsurprisingly, butterfly
chases didn't factor into Willett's ideal summer evening. He instead
advocated that extra daylight be used for target practice, warning
that "the nation may some day have cause to be thankful that by this
means opportunities for rifle practice will have been created."

With fear sufficiently mongered, he closed his pamphlet with a call to
action, urging "every man and woman, and every youth in particular" to
write to their representatives in Parliament in support of a 6-month
trial of seasonal time. [fn:5]

Willett paid to have the pamphlet printed and began distributing
copies everywhere he went. Despite his zeal (or perhaps because of
it), not many people took the proposal seriously. _The Spectator_, an
influential London weekly newspaper, was "not sanguine of its
success," and it seems most people agreed.

Willett responded with a letter to the editor chastising him for his
lack of faith. If he had any hope of being taken seriously, the editor
of _The Spectator_ squashed it by squeezing Willet's irate reply in
alongside a note from another reader who, for reasons that are
unclear, felt compelled to share his opinion of squirrels. (If you're
wondering, he was pretty high on the squirrel: "a species of
handmaiden" and a "happy-go-lucky" creature "intending little ill, and
if he does offend at times, his company and capers on the lawn or on
the gean-tree or pear-tree make up for his mischiefs.") [fn:8]

Undeterred, Willett spent the next year writing letters, printing
pamphlets, wining and dining prominent businessmen, and lobbying
lawmakers in support of seasonal time. He eventually won over a member
of the House of Commons, Sir Robert Pearce. Pearce introduced the
first Daylight Saving Bill, which was subsequently referred to a
commitee tasked with studying its effects. The ensuing hearings
provided Willett with a captive audience - a situation which he
thoroughly abused.

After introducing himself, Willett asked permission to read a list of
the names of the gentleman who supported his proposal. "I do not think
it is necessary to read all these names," said the Chairman. After
some back and forth, Willett grudgingly agreed to read only "the
principal" names.

He then proceeded to rattle off the names and positions of 84 men and
organizations, frequently stopping for some parenthetical aside,
before the Chairman mercifully interjected that "for the present, that
will do for reading the names. Will you please go on with your main
evidence?" [fn:9]

Willett launched into his prepared remarks, waxing eloquent about the
joyous morning hours of the day and the beauty of youth before the
Chairman cut him off again, begging him to "save the time of the
Committee very considerably" by focusing on addressing the objections
to his proposal.

I'll spare you the details of all of the objections to his
proposal. Suffice it to say that there were a lot of them, and they
make for tedious reading. To give you a sense of the opposition:

- the Liverpool Cotton Association objected to the shortening of their
  trading window with American markets
- the Director of the Meteorological Office objected on the grounds
  that the timestamps on meteorological observations would be ambiguous
- the general manager of the Great Eastern Railway worried that the
  many alterations would cause mass confusion and delays

Many of the witnesses supported an alternate proposal to cope with the
confusion of adjusting the clocks: rather than revert back each
autumn, why not just make a one-time adjustment and permanently adopt
Mid-European Time (GMT +1:00)? This would afford the extra hour of
daylight in the summer without the pain of coordinating multiple clock
adjustments every year. The obvious drawback to this proposal is that
sunrise would be very late during the winter - after 9:00 am in
London.

Another contingent didn't see any reason to adjust the clocks at
all. Why not just convince everyone to wake up an hour earlier in the
summer? No need to legislate what could be achieved by applying a bit
of common sense.

Of the countless objections to seasonal time, one of the most frequent
involved the 8 clock adjustments. When asked his opinion of the 20
minute adjustments, Sir Arthur Conan Doyle - yep, _that_ Sir Arthur
Conan Doyle, creator of Sherlock Holmes and early supporter of
seasonal time - admitted: "I could not quite understand that there was
any particular reason for four 20 minutes - no doubt he had something
in mind when he wrote it - no doubt there was some reason for it; but
it struck me on simply reading it that a single alteration of an hour
would be a round number, and cause less confusion and attain almost
the same result."

The contention over this point is so frequent and so tedious that
while reading the proceedings, I wanted to grab Willett by the
shoulders and beg him, "For the love of God, man, just make it an hour
and spare everyone the next 67 pages of this transcript!" (I've since
seen the error of my ways - more on that later.)

But Willett was a True Believer. Convinced of the perfection and
righteousness of his scheme, he made no concessions. The body would
adjust more easily to waking up 20 minutes earlier than to a full
hour, he argued. And in the inevitable mixups following a clock
adjustment, being 20 minutes early or late to an appointment would be
less catastrophic than a full hour.

The Select Committee on the Daylight Savings Bill met 13 times and
interviewed 42 men over the course of 56 days. In the end, they
ignored Willett's insistence on 20 minute adjustments and recommended
that Britain adopt a 1-hour alteration of the clocks in April and
again in September.

A promising, young politician named Winston Churchill, then the
President of the Board of Trade, "read the report of this committee
with much interest and with a lively recognition" of the Bill's
advantages. [fn:10]

Unfortunately for Willett, the Prime Minister took a much less lively
view of the bill's advantages. "The Government have no intention of
giving facilities for the passing of the Daylight Saving Bill,"
Herbert Asquith announced during the July 8th, 1908 session of the
House of Commons. In other words, it wasn't even up for
discussion.[fn:11]

Really, Herbert? Would it have killed you to say something 8 weeks
ago?

Willett was undeterred. He spent the next 9 months writing to over 400
newspapers to solicit support for his proposal. In March of 1909,
another Willett ally named Thomas Dobson introduced a revised Daylight
Saving Bill to the House of Commons. This iteration dropped the
controversial 20-minute adjustments in favor of the 1 hour adjustments
recommended in the Select Committee's report.

Several members of the 1908 Committee were unenthused by the prospect
of another visit from William Willett and hastily tried to squash the
bill before its second reading. Just when it looked as though the bill
was dead on arrival, Churchill stood up and rescued it with the brand
of masterful rhetoric for which he would soon become famous.

He urged his colleagues to take the bill seriously and consider the
many benefits that could be gotten for an "extra yawn some morning in
April, an extra snooze some morning in September." He conceded that
there were valid objections, particularly from the agricultural
sector, and that the matter required more study before it was ready
for a vote. He proposed that the bill once again be put before a
select committee and the motion passed (I like to imagine Churchill
shouting the line an "extra snooze some morning in September" over a
triumphant crescendo of horns, prompting a raucous standing ovation in
the House of Commons.) [fn:12]

So once again, William Willett found himself before a Select Committee
of the House of Commons tasked with studying the effects of seasonal
time.

Willett's reputation as a rambler proceeded him. By way of greeting,
the Chairman told Willett, "I had better ask you at once to state, as
shortly as you can, the fresh evidence you have to place before the
Committee in regard to this Bill?"

Willett being Willett, he totally ignored the qualifier "as shortly as
you can" and launched into reading from a giant stack of letters. He
quickly made it clear that he wasn't happy that the bill included a
1-hour time change instead of a series of 20 minute changes.

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
I advocate the introduction of this wedge into our former arrangements
of life by means of the thin end... and I am still of the opinion
that, in order to effect this alteration in the habits of forty odd
millions of people, it is desirable that the thin end of the wedge
should be used, and not the thick end first. [fn:13]
#+END_QUOTE

This second hearing was much like the first: tedious and divisive.

The committee heard from farmers who didn't want to shrink the already
short window between the sun evaporating the dew off of the plums,
leaving them ready to be picked, and the departure of the train that
would ship them into town.

There were farmers who were sure passage of the bill would lead to a
revolt among the farmhands and there were farmers who were sure the
employees would thank them for the extra hour of daylight.

A representative of Big Banana was all for the bill, since fruit
consumption peaked in the active, summer months. A tramcar operator
thought the bill would be a boon to business. A theater manager was
certain it would spell the end of his.

Several people were concerned for the women; if the men left for work
an hour earlier, the women would have to wake up an hour earlier to
get their tea.

It's funny listening to a roomful of men argue over how women would
react, as if they were discussing an inscrutable, alien, race with a
collective mind whose inner workings can only be guessed at. I suppose
it's unsurprising, given the time period, that no one thought to just
bring in some women and ask for their opinion.

This committee got hung up on all of the same arguments as the
previous one: why not just adopt Mid-European time? Why not just
encourage everyone to wake up earlier? Was a 1-hour adjustment really
better than several smaller ones?

The second committee met 16 times and heard from 25 different
witnesses. In August, it issued its recommendation after almost 5
months of debate. Due to the "great diversity of opinion... your
Committee recommend that the Bill be not further proceeded
with." [fn:14]

Willett campaigned for seasonal time for the rest of his life. His
supporters in the legislature put forth a seasonal time bill every
year between 1911 and 1914, and every time Asquith's Government
refused to even hear it. [fn:15]

In March 1914, Willett published the 19th edition of his pamphlet,
"The Waste of Daylight". By that time he had secured the support of
285 of the 650 members of the House of Commons and countless chambers
of commerce and trade societies. [fn:16]

He died of influenza one year later in March 1915 at just 58 years old.

His timing really sucked.

* Act III: Total War

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
You never want a serious crisis go to waste. And what I mean by
that, it's an opportunity to do things you think you could not do
before.

-- Rahm Emanuel, former White House Chief of Staff
#+END_QUOTE

14 months later the House of Commons passed the Daylight Saving Bill
with a lack of ceremony that belied its contentious history.

Votes in favor: 170

Votes against: 2

2!

After a decade of fretting over the right time to pick turnips and
whether children would have difficulty falling asleep in the summer,
Parliament adopted seasonal time with virtually zero opposition.

What happened?

If you were paying attention in history class, you may recall that
there was a war going on when the bill finally passed on May
8th, 1916. The British Empire had been fighting in the First World War
since August 1914. At the beginning of the war, the Liberal government
promoted a policy of "business as usual" designed to preserve the
morale of the British people.

In May 1915, just 2 months after Willett's death, the invaders that he
had warned of in his pamphlet arrived in London - or more accurately,
over London, via zeppelin. That extra hour of target practice was
starting to look pretty valuable.

Within a few months, Parliament introduced military conscription and
young, unmarried men were shipped off to a combat zone where poison
gas had just been introduced to the world. The headlines in _The
Times_ bemoaning Britain's shortage of munitions did little to inspire
confidence in the troops.[fn:17]

In July of 1916, the British army suffered 57,470 casualties on the
_first day_ of the Battle of the Somme.[fn:18] For comparison, the
United States suffered an estimated 36,747 casualties in the Iraq War,
which lasted nearly 9 years.[fn:19] The notion of "business as usual"
suddenly seemed absurd in the face of the reports from the
battlefield, where aeroplanes and a new war machine called the "tank"
were inflicting carnage on an unprecedented scale.

"Business as Usual" gave way to "Total War." As the outputs of the
Empire's economic system shifted from gooseberries and cricket matches
to munitions and machine guns, energy emerged as the new bottleneck in
the system. Thus, the system was primed to adopt any change which
alleviated the bottleneck.

The ultimate adoption of seasonal time after so many years of failure
is consistent with modern systems theory. In her excellent essay
"Leverage Points: Places to Intervene in a Complex System" [fn:20],
the late Donna Meadows argues that changing the _Goals_ of a system
provides more leverage than changing its _Rules and Parameters_,
because the Rules and Parameters are simply an extension of the
system's Goals. By the same token, changing the _Paradigm_ or
_Mindset_ of a system presents even greater leverage, because the
Goals of a system arise from its Paradigm.

Willett fought admirably for years to change a Rule. They argued over
Parameters (20 minute increments or 1 hour?  Fall back in August or
September?), but even his opponents conceded that his Goals were
admirable; leaving aside the owners of theatres and coal companies,
nobody was arguing against more recreation or energy efficiency.

He faced resistance insofar as his proposed Rule change conflicted
with the Goals of others. Changing the clocks jeopardized many
politicians' Goal of not getting laughed out of office. Farmers,
railroad operators, and pub owners saw it as a financial
liability. The general public, fairly or not, perceived it as a threat
to social order and cohesion.

But things like ticket sales at the theatre or how Bessie will respond
to being milked a little earlier start to seem pretty unimportant
after a giant balloon starts dropping bombs on your city, a blockade
of U-Boats in the harbor has blown up all your food and oil, and the
men in your family are lying in a ditch in some god-forsaken field in
France trying not to choke on mustard gas.

"Get the plums off to market in time" is a Goal which stems from the
Paradigm "Business as usual."

"Total War" is a Paradigm which leads to very different Goals, like
"Don't starve," and "Build a ton of bombs and drop them on Prussians."

The odds of effecting radical change are much higher under "Total War"
than "Business as usual." Thus, the mindset fostered by existential
threat explains how seasonal time went from being laughed out of the
legislature to universally accepted.

* Act IV: French Fries and Fatalities

#+BEGIN_VERSE
Things fall apart; the centre cannot hold;
Mere anarchy is loosed upon the world,
The blood-dimmed tide is loosed, and everywhere
The ceremony of innocence is drowned;
The best lack all conviction, while the worst
Are full of passionate intensity.

-- The Second Coming, W.B. Yeats
#+END_VERSE

When a US politican needs to appear proactive during an energy crisis,
Daylight Saving Time is their silver bullet of choice. The United
States adopted seasonal time when we entered WWI, reinstituted it
year-round in the aftermath of Pearl Harbor, and then made another
attempt at year-round DST in 1974 during the OPEC oil embargo.

So in the summer of 2005 when the average price of a regular unleaded
gallon of gas in the US soared to nearly $3.00 [fn:21], almost triple
the price from the beginning of 2002, Congress knew what to do.

A politician would probably call the Energy Policy Act of 2005 [fn:22]
"comprehensive". A normal person who bothered to read its 11 page
table of contents would probably call it a schizophrenic, kitchen-sink
of a bill. Among other things, it proposed to:

- Invest $200 million into coal (yay!)
- Authorize tax credits for wind energy producers
- Arm security personnel at nuclear plants with machine guns
- Fund a scholarship on behalf of the Nuclear Regulatory Commission
- Exempt fracking companies from the protections in the Safe Drinking
  Water Act (nothing to see here!)
- Cut royalties that oil companies are obligated to pay the federal
  government to incentivize deepwater drilling in the Gulf of Mexico
- Commission a study on the benefits of telecommuting for federal
  employees

And, oh yeah, it would also extend Daylight Savings Time by 1 month.

Unsurprisingly, a lot of people hated the idea, including the
Conference of Catholic Bishops and the United Synagogue of
Conservative Judaism, who opposed the extension on the grounds that
pre-dawn religious services are poorly attended. The head of the
National Parent Teacher Association warned that children walking to
school were at increased risk of being mowed down by cars and
kidnapped in the morning darkness.[fn:23]

Stop me if you've heard this one: a priest, a rabbi, and a school
teacher walk into the door of their congressman's office.

That's it - that was the joke.

They walk into a closed door, because their representative is in his
office drinking scotch with the lobbyist from the sporting goods
industry who just delivered a check made out to his re-election
campaign and oh-by-the-way just so happens to think seasonal time is
great for America.

Forget it, it was funny in my head.

To the chagrine of clergymen and the delight of Dick's Sporting Goods
shareholders, George Dubya signed the bill on August 8th, 2005. But
this bill included an uncharacteristically sensible provision: it
required the Department of Energy to report back on the effect of
extending Daylight Saving Time.

The DoE put a few Ph.D's on it and 3 years later they came back with
their findings. An extra month of Daylight Savings Time *does* save
energy - 17 Trillion Btu of it.

"Hooo-wee, that's a whole-buncha Btus!" you're probably thinking.

But it's not; the US consumed 101,000 Trillion Btu in 2007. In other
words, Extended Daylight Saving Time resulted in total energy savings
of 0.02%. [fn:24] Which admittedly isn't great, but it gets worse.

A 2008 study examined the effects of DST in Indiana, which until 2006
was unique in that only certain counties in the state practiced
DST. The presence of a naturally occurring treatment and control group
made the Hoosier state the perfect place to study the effect of
seasonal time on energy consumption.

Incidentally, "Indiana, the perfect place to study the effect of
seasonal time on energy consumption," would be a better state motto
than "The Crossroads of America." Or how about, "Indiana: We apologize
for Mike Pence." You can have those for free, Indiana Department of
Tourism.

Anyways, the authors of the study concluded that not only did DST not
save energy - it actually increased energy consumption by 1%! Turns
out all of the savings from reduced usage of artifical lighting were
wiped out by people leaving their HVAC units cranked up later in the
evening.[fn:25]

So DST's value as an energy-saving device is dubious, at best. And if
the most serious problem with DST were air-conditioner usage in
Indiana, The Atlantic wouldn't be running articles with titles like,
"[[https://www.theatlantic.com/national/archive/2013/11/daylight-saving-time-americas-greatest-shame/354753/][Daylight Saving Time Is America's Greatest Shame]]."

Huh. Greatest shame - really? Genocide against the indigenous
population, slavery, Japanese internment camps... fine, those weren't
our proudest moments. But according to the Atlantic, our barbaric
timekeeping practices are what send America ducking behind the cereal
display whenever it spots Sweden in the supermarket.

Offensively headlined though it may be, the article does reflect a
growing resentment for seasonal time. [[https://www.petition2congress.com/ctas/end-daylight-savings-time][This petition]] to abolish DST
currently has over 380,000 signatures from concerned citizens like
steve k., who urges lawmakers to "stop daylight time right now do it
right now its too much for florida get it out of florida."

Or this thoughtful Texan, who writes, "PLEASE PLEASE PLEASE LEAVE IT
AT DAY LIGHT SAVINGS YEAR AROUND. NO SINCE IN FALLING BACK FOR A FEW
MONTHS. YOU KEEP DAY LIGHT SAVINGS SO LONG PEOPLE THING STANDARD TIME
IS THAT!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!"

Someone from Cascade, IA warns "Please end daylight savings
time.. it's always even more later than you think!" Yikes. What does
Someone from Cascade, IA know that we don't?

"Please listen to all the voices," says Someone from Alpharetta,
Georgia, "and end this chaos in the name of saving energy! We are not
magically creating an hour of daylight by changing our clocks by an
hour! We're creating chaos that we don't need in the world."

As a general rule, when someone urges me to do something at the behest
of "the voices," I do not do that thing. However, in this case, maybe
Someone from Alpharetta, Georgia, has a point: DST does create
chaos. Twice a year, every year, we reset our clocks and brace for:

- Thousands of traffic fatalities [fn:26]
- A 3-5% increased risk of heart attack every March [fn:27]
- Countless lifetimes of prison sentences issued by grumpy,
  sleep-deprived judges [fn:28]
- A 5.7% increase in workplace injuries each March [fn:29]
- Nearly half of a billion dollars in lost productivity annually in
  the United States alone [fn:30]

A 1-hour time change is simply too much for fragile meat-sacks like us
to cope with. Every March, for weeks following the time change, we get
sleepy and do dumb things, like wrap our cars around telephone poles
and eat enough Hardee's french fries to power an NFL stadium for 34
hours. (Gross but true, see [[*Appendix][Appendix]]).

Defenders of DST argue that, sure, sleep-deprived motorists crash more
often during one week in March, but on aggregate DST makes our
highways safer by reducing the number of cars on the road after
dark. But that argument has been pretty convincingly refuted; sleep
deprivation has a much stronger effect on crash risk than ambient
light, and even this small effect of ambient light tends only to shift
crashes from the sunnier evenings to the darker mornings. [fn:26]

Lawmakers have started to take notice of the groundswell against
DST. A century after the passage of the Daylight Saving Bill the
long-term survival of Daylight Saving Time is very much in doubt. My
home state of Washington is considering legislation to abolish
Daylight Saving Time [fn:31], and we're not alone: California, Iowa,
Montana, Wyoming, New Mexico, Massachusetts, Michigan, Texas,
Nebraska, and North Dakota are also considering scrapping seasonal
time. [fn:32]

[TODO: transition with quote from one of Willett's opponents about what
a stupid idea DST was]

* Act V: Hubris

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
You're going to have such great health care at a tiny fraction of the
cost. And it's going to be so easy.

-- U.S. presidential candidate Donald Trump, Oct. 25, 2016
#+END_QUOTE

Is seasonal time really an archaic practice? If so, can we draw any
lessons from its arduous passage that we can apply to its reform? And
what is the legacy of its chief proponent, William Willett?

Whatever your opinion of seasonal time, it's undeniable that there are
thousands of dead people who would otherwise still be alive were it
not for DST. If Willett's legacy includes children across the world
frolicking in the evening sunlight, it must also include all of the
children mutilated in car accidents on the Monday following the spring
forward.

You might say that's unfair; Willett couldn't possibly have foreseen
the rise in traffic fatalities on highways which hadn't even been
built yet any more than he could have predicted the effect on
french-fry consumption.

But does that really exonerate him? _Of course_ he couldn't have
foreseen all of the second-order effects of tampering with part of the
bedrock of society - no one could. So why was he so gung-ho about it?
What gives someone like Willett the conviction to lead a crusade with
such potential for disaster with such self-assurance?

In my experience, an irrational level of self-confidence is
disproportionately common in two groups of people: lunatics and rich
white guys. Willett was a card-carrying member of both.

Ok, fine, "lunatic" may be overstating it, but not by much. Remember
when he chastised the editor of _The Spectator_ for being less than
sanguine of Willett's success? The editor who printed Willett's letter
alongside the Squirrel Guy? That juxtaposition makes more sense when
you read Willett's letter. Here's a representative excerpt:

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
Are these words quite worthy of the Spectator? ... [I]t is clear
that we have passed the Slough of Despond. We are now climbing the
Hill Difficulty. The Palace Beautiful awaits us at the top. Mistrust
and Timorous will never reach it! Surely the "Great Heart" of the
Spectator should encourage pilgrims to climb the Hill, and should
use every weapon he can against any Grims that may bar the way or any
lions that may appear to forbid the happy arrival of the Bill before
his Majesty the King. What is there to fear? [fn:8]
#+END_QUOTE

Contrast _that_ response to critism with GVH's closing remarks at the
Wellington Philosophical Society, in which he basically said, "Well,
shucks, I thought it was kind of a good idea," then presumably went
back to his couch to watch reruns of The Office and eat Ben and
Jerry's out of the carton.

That's Timorous for you! Abandoning the pilgrimage to the Palace
Beautiful at the first sign of a few lions and Grims!

Hudson is the kind of person who, when he has to send an email with
more than 3 recipients, rereads it at least 10 times and has to google
the rules regarding semicolon usage before clicking send. Willett is
that guy who hits reply-all to 300 people and dashes off the first
thing that pops into his head, ignoring all those red and green
squiggles because he's fairly certain the word 'lose' has two 'o's -
thanks anyway, spell-check!

Willett was so sure of himself that he dedicated the last 8 years of
his life to proselytizing for a cause that would lead to massive
disruption based on practically zero empirical evidence - and look
where it's gotten us! Isn't this level of belief tantamount to
insanity, or at the least, arrogance?

And if so, well, that's problematic; because if he was an arrogant
lunatic, then we have to admit that he was an effective one. Which
begs the question, was Willett ultimately successful precisely
_because_ of his (over)confidence?

It does pay to be overconfident. Apparently, in the good ol' USA it's
now sufficient qualification to sit in the Oval Office. According to
one depressing study, we incentivize overconfidence by conferring
higher status on people with an inflated sense of their own
abilities. Worse, overconfidence looks more like competence than does
actual competence.[fn:33]

Imagine if Willett had been completely transparent and said, "Gosh, you
raise a good point, Farmer Ben - I _hadn't_ taken the shelf-life of
gooseberries into account when I wrote my pamphlet. The only thing of
which I can be certain is that altering our society's timekeeping
practices will affect our lives and our children's lives in ways that
no one in this room can possibly anticipate. Some effects may be
harmful, but given the limited information that's available to us I
think it's more likely than not that this will benefit society. So
whaddya say? Who's with me?"

No one obviously - he would have been bullied out of the room by some
pigheaded farmer who was just as irrationally opposed to DST as Willett
was in favor of it.

There's some evidence that Willett began his campaign with a healthy
sense of self-doubt and was forced to abandon it along the way. In his
original pamphlet, he called for a mere 6-month trial of DST. But when
asked if he believed the Bill could be passed on a trial basis,
Willett's response was telling. "Yes," he said, "but then you
immediately impart an element of doubt, and you cannot expect the
House of Commons, I should think, to justify a Bill at all with an
element of doubt in it."

Efforts to curb the proliferation of nuclear weapons, guns, and false
confidence all suffer from the same problem: somebody has to give
theirs up first. Asymmetric compliance means that Reasonable People
who adopt a policy of intellectual humility are left defenseless
against Bad Guys who don't. So Willett bowed to reality and said,
"Yep, this will definitely work, believe me," and a lot of people did.

As Charles Duhigg points out In The Power of Habit, it's no accident
that the second of Alcoholic's Anonymous 12 steps is to "believe that
a power greater than ourselves could restore us to sanity." People who
report a higher-degree of "spirituality" are more likely to achieve
long-term recovery [fn:34]. One interpretation: faith, which is
nothing more than irrational belief, is the foundation of change.

In _Influence: The Psychology of Persuasion_, Robert Cialdini
describes the process by which Chinese communists weaponized the power
of belief during the Korean War. They began by asking American POWs to
make an innocuous statement like, "America isn't perfect."  They then
leveraged this small profession of belief into progressively larger
ones until these red-blooded, apple pie-eating, God-fearing, American
men were fervent supporters of communism. [fn:35]

Churches, cults, and coups all live and die according to the degree
that their members believe. Without an irrational level of faith,
Willett would have abandoned his campaign after his 100th letter to a
newspaper editor went unanswered.

So yes, seasonal time may never have been adopted were it not for
Willett's unshakeable belief. But it's important to remember that
Willett died a failure. Faith may be a necessary condition for change,
but it's not sufficient. It took the outbreak of one of the bloodiest
wars in human history to push the Daylight Saving Bill through, an
even bigger war to revive it, and a series of energy crises to make it
stick.

Humans hate change. This is actually pretty sensible - constantly
changing the rules and parameters of our systems would create wild
instability, so inertia staves off anarchy. The greater the change,
the more risk it introduces into the system, the more strongly we'll
oppose it. It follows then that the best time to introduce change is
when some destabilizing force has already overcome inertia.

The Patriot Act would have been inconceivable on September
10th, 2001. A national speed limit of 55 mph would never have passed
without the oil crisis of 1973. It took Pearl Harbor to get the United
States into WWII. Before the bubble burst in 2008, no one would have
believed that American taxpayers would come to the rescue of subprime
mortgage lenders. The idea of women working in factories was
unthinkable before the advent of Total War, but somebody had to build
bombs and all of the men were busy dropping them.[fn:36]

If you've been taking notes on how to effect change, the formula so
far is:

1. Delude yourself and others to build influence.
2. Wait for a crisis to come along, and then...
3. Ride that Trojan Horse into society's midst and exploit the ensuing
   chaos to secure your objective before anyone can protest.

The world is an icky place.

Maybe we can't fix the world, but perhaps we can we find redemption
for Willett? I like to think that there's a more satisfying
explanation for his self-assurance than that he was an arrogant
demagogue who would say anything to advance his personal agenda. Maybe
his faith was rooted in true conviction that he was onto a great idea.

As the unlikely defender of William Willett's legacy in the court of
public opinion, I present the following arguments in his defense.

First: you could argue that Willett was foolish to tamper with time,
but not that he was arrogant or reckless. He engaged with opponents of
DST from every walk of life, patiently hearing the concerns of
farmers, financeers, and shopkeepers alike. In many cases, he even
conceded the legitimacy of their objections. He was a tireless and at
times insufferable cheerleader for seasonal time, but he never denied
its inherent risks.

Any large-scale intervention in a complex system requires a touch of
hubris. Willett may have had a tad more than necessary, but we can
forgive his excess in light of the fact that he was onto a great idea.

Many of the original objections to seasonal time have been rendered
moot by modern technology; a peek at modern farm equipment would have
knocked the overalls off of Willett's opponents from the agricultural
sector. By the same token, many of seasonal time's ill effects today
stem from technology (e.g., cars) that didn't exist when Willett was
alive.

It's hardly Willett's fault that we haven't adapted seasonal time to
reflect technological and societal change. He would surely be dismayed
to learn that more than a century after he published his pamphlet,
we're still using the same, archaic, implementation of seasonal time -
especially considering that he was the one person who foresaw the
self-inflicted death and destruction that we sign up for year after
year.

He warned everyone _repeatedly_ that a 1 hour time change would be too
disruptive, and everyone ignored him. Remember all of that business
about introducing change by means of the thin end of the wedge, and
how obnoxiously persistent he was about it? Sounded silly at the
time. Not so much now that sleepy people routinely sit inside huge
chunks of metal hurtling past each other at relative speeds of well
over 100 miles an hour.

Critics of Daylight Saving Time are right: this is madness. Surely
there has to be a better way?

* Act VI: Willett Time

#+BEGIN_VERSE
  Chairman: I rather gather from what you have said that your ideal
            method of making the change would be - if by a miracle
            every clock and every watch could be made to gain a minute
            a day?
  Willett:  Half a minute almost would do it.
  Chairman: Gain a minute a day beginning in the beginning of April, and
            get half an hour fast by July, and then lose a minute each
            day afterwards, and get right on the 1st of October?
  Willett:  Yes.
  Chairman: That would be your idea of perfection?
  Willett:  Yes.
  Chairman: But, of course, that is impossible?
  Willett:  Of course, that is impossible.
#+END_VERSE

First, let's get a few things out of the way.

Year-round Daylight Saving Time amounts to nothing more than using a
different time zone. Depending on where you are relative to the
eastern border of your current time zone and how much you value
daylight in the evening relative to daylight in the morning, this
might be an attractive option. But the people who argue, "If Daylight
Saving Time is so great, why don't we have it the whole year?" are
fundamentally missing the value proposition of seasonal time.

The Earth has a tilted axis and orbits the Sun in an ellipse. There is
simply no getting around the fact that we experience the Sun
differently in June than in December. See for yourself in the chart
below, which shows daylight hours (in local time) at varying latitude
throughout the year.

(Hint: it's interactive! Drag the slider to change the day of the
year.)

#+BEGIN_EXPORT html
<script src="https://d3js.org/d3.v4.min.js"></script>

<style type="text/css">
  .chart rect { stroke: white; }
  #map-container { width: 100%; }
  #slide-container {
      display: flex;
      width: 100%;
  }

  g:hover text { opacity: 1; } /* Shows the sunrise and sunset times, only on hover */
  .sunrise-text {opacity: 0;}
  .sunset-text {opacity: 0;}
  .day:hover { fill-opacity: 0.7; }

  /* The slider itself */
  .slider {
      -webkit-appearance: none;  /* Override default CSS styles */
      appearance: none;
      width: 100%; /* Full-width */
      height: 25px; /* Specified height */
      background: #d3d3d3; /* Grey background */
      outline: none; /* Remove outline */
      opacity: 0.7; /* Set transparency (for mouse-over effects on hover) */
      -webkit-transition: .2s; /* 0.2 seconds transition on hover */
      transition: opacity .2s;
  }

  .slider:hover {opacity: 1;}

  /* The slider handle (use webkit (Chrome, Opera, Safari, Edge) and moz (Firefox) to override default look) */
  .slider::-webkit-slider-thumb {
      -webkit-appearance: none; /* Override default look */
      appearance: none;
      width: 25px; /* Set a specific slider handle width */
      height: 25px; /* Slider handle height */
      background: #4CAF50; /* Green background */
      cursor: pointer; /* Cursor on hover */
  }

  .slider::-moz-range-thumb {
      width: 25px; /* Set a specific slider handle width */
      height: 25px; /* Slider handle height */
      background: #4CAF50; /* Green background */
      cursor: pointer; /* Cursor on hover */
  }
</style>

<div id="map-container">
</div>
<div id="slide-container">
<div style="margin-right: 25; width: 15%;">
    <p id="day-of-year-text">Date: </p>
    </div>
    <div style="width: 75%">
    <input type="range" min="0" max="364" value="0" class="slider" id="day-of-year">
    </div>
</div>

<script>
var totalHeight = 400;
var tickHeight = 40;
var titleHeight = 25;
var mapHeight = totalHeight - tickHeight - titleHeight;
var totalWidth = document.getElementById('map-container').offsetWidth;
var plotWidth = totalWidth - 20;

var latitudes = Array.from(new Array(180 + 1), (x, i) => i - 90)
    .filter((x) => x % 5 == 0);

var svgMap = d3.select("#map-container")
    .append("svg")
    .attr("class", "chart")
    .attr("width", totalWidth) // TODO: Needed?
    .attr("height", totalHeight);

svgMap.append("image")
    .attr("xlink:href", "../assets/willett-time/earth.jpeg")
    .attr("y", titleHeight)
    .attr("width", "95%")
    .attr("height", (svgMap.attr("height") - tickHeight - titleHeight));

svgMap.append("text")
    .attr("x", (totalWidth / 2))
    .attr("y", 20)
    .attr("height", titleHeight)
    .attr("text-anchor", "middle")
    .style("font-size", "22px")
    .style("text-decoration", "underline")
    .text("Daylight Hours at Varying Latitude");

var numRows = latitudes.length;
var rowHeight = mapHeight / numRows;

function formatHourOfDay(x) {
    if (isNaN(x)) {
        return "--:--";
    } else {
        var hr = Math.floor(x);
        var minute = Math.floor(60 * (x - hr));
        var pad = (x) => x.toString().padStart(2, "0");
        return pad(hr) + ":" + pad(minute);
    }
}


// TODO: recalculate on resize?
var hourScale = d3.scaleLinear()
    .domain([0, 24])
    .range([0, plotWidth]);

var scaleMidnightToNoon = d3.scaleLinear()
    .domain([0, 12])
    .range([0, 100]);

var yOffsets = Array.from(new Array(numRows).keys()).map((i) => titleHeight + (i * rowHeight)).reverse();

function updatePlots(dayOfYear) {

    function daylightHoursWhenSunDidNotRise(lat) {
        var step = lat > 0 ? -10 : 10;
        var sunrise;
        do {
            lat += step;
            sunrise = willet_time.clock.sunrise(lat, dayOfYear);
        } while (isNaN(sunrise));

        if (sunrise >= 6.0) { // the sun never came up here
            return [12, 12];
        } else { // the sun never went down here
            return [0, 24];
        }
    }

    var daylightHours = latitudes.map(function (lat) {
        var sunriseHour = willet_time.clock.sunrise(lat, dayOfYear);
        var sunsetHour = willet_time.clock.sunset(lat, dayOfYear);
        if (isNaN(sunriseHour)) {
            return daylightHoursWhenSunDidNotRise(lat)
            ;
        }
        return [sunriseHour, sunsetHour];
    });
    updateMap(daylightHours);
}

function updateMap(daylightHours) {
    var groups = svgMap.selectAll("g")
        .data(daylightHours);

    var groupsEnter = groups.enter().append("g")
        .attr("transform", (_, i) => "translate(0, " + yOffsets[i] + ")");

    // ENTER
    // day
    groupsEnter.append("rect")
        .attr("class", "day")
        .attr("height", rowHeight)
        .attr("fill", "yellow")
        .attr("fill-opacity", "0.45")
        .attr("x", (d, i) => hourScale(d[0]))
        .attr("width", (d, i) => (hourScale(d[1] - d[0])));

    groupsEnter.append("text")
        .attr("class", "sunrise-text")
        .attr("x", (d, i) => 2 + hourScale(d[0]))
        .attr("y", rowHeight / 2)
        .attr("dy", ".35em")
        .attr("width", "100%")
        .attr("height", rowHeight)
        .attr("font-size", "11")
        .text((d, i) => d[0] > 0 && d[0] < 12 ? formatHourOfDay(d[0]) : null);

    groupsEnter.append("text")
        .attr("class", "sunset-text")
        .attr("x", (d, i) => -35 + hourScale(d[1]))
        .attr("y", rowHeight / 2)
        .attr("dy", ".35em")
        .attr("width", "100%")
        .attr("height", rowHeight)
        .attr("font-size", "11")
        .text((d, i) => d[1] > 12 && d[1] < 24 ? formatHourOfDay(d[1]) : null);


    // night - left
    groupsEnter.append("rect")
        .attr("class", "night-left")
        .attr("height", rowHeight)
        .attr("fill", "blue")
        .attr("fill-opacity", "0.45")
        .attr("x", 0)
        .attr("width", (d, i) => hourScale(d[0]));

    // night - right
    groupsEnter.append("rect")
        .attr("class", "night-right")
        .attr("height", rowHeight)
        .attr("fill", "blue")
        .attr("fill-opacity", "0.45")
        .attr("x", (d, i) => hourScale(d[1]))
    //.attr("width", (d, i) => hourScale(d[0]));
        .attr("width", (d, i) => plotWidth - hourScale(d[1]));

    groupsEnter.append("text")
        .attr("x", 10)
        .attr("y", rowHeight / 2)
        .attr("dy", ".35em")
        .attr("width", "100%")
        .attr("height", rowHeight)
        .attr("font-size", "11")
        .text((d, i) => (i % 2 == 0) ? latitudes[i] + "°" : null);

    groupsEnter.append("text")
        .attr("x", "95%")
        .attr("y", rowHeight / 2)
        .attr("dy", ".35em")
        .attr("width", "100%")
        .attr("height", rowHeight)
        .attr("font-size", "11")
        .text((d, i) => (i % 2 == 0) ? latitudes[i] + "°" : null);

    // UPDATE
    groups.select('.day')
        .attr("x", (d) => hourScale(d[0]))
        .attr("width", (d) => (hourScale(d[1] - d[0])));

    groups.select('.sunrise-text')
        .attr("x", (d, i) => 2 + hourScale(d[0]))
        .text((d, i) => d[0] > 0 && d[0] < 12 ? formatHourOfDay(d[0]) : null);

    groups.select('.sunset-text')
        .attr("x", (d, i) => -35 + hourScale(d[1]))
        .text((d, i) => d[1] > 12 && d[1] < 24 ? formatHourOfDay(d[1]) : null);

    groups.select('.night-left')
        .attr("x", 0)
        .attr("width", (d) => hourScale(d[0]));

    groups.select('.night-right')
        .attr("x", (d) => hourScale(d[1]))
        .attr("width", (d, i) => plotWidth - hourScale(d[1]));
}

var initDayOfYear = 0;
updatePlots(initDayOfYear)

var formatTime = d3.timeFormat("%H:%M"),
    formatHour = function(d) { return formatTime(new Date(2016, 0, 1, d, 0)); };

var xAxis = d3.axisBottom(hourScale)
    .tickFormat(formatHour);
var tickGroup = svgMap.append('g')
    .attr('width', '100%')
    .attr('height', tickHeight)
    .attr('transform', 'translate(0, ' + (svgMap.attr("height") - tickHeight) + ')')
    .call(xAxis);

var xAxisLabel = svgMap.append('text')
    .attr('text-anchor', 'middle')
    .attr('x', plotWidth / 2)
    .attr('y', totalHeight - 10)
    .text('Hour of Day');

var slider = document.getElementById("day-of-year");
var dayOfYearText = document.getElementById("day-of-year-text");

function onDayOfYearChanged(dayOfYear) {
    updatePlots(dayOfYear);
    dayOfYearText.innerHTML = "Date: " + dayOfYearToString(dayOfYear);
}

slider.oninput = function() {
    onDayOfYearChanged(parseInt(this.value));
}

function dayOfYearToString(n) {
    if (n < 0 || n > 364) {
        return "--";
    } else {
        return new Date(2017, 0, n + 1, 0, 0, 0, 0)
            .toString() // 'Sun Feb 05 2017 00:00:00 GMT-0800 (PST)'
            .split(' ') // [ 'Sun', 'Feb', '05', '2017', '00:00:00', 'GMT-0800', '(PST)' ]
            .slice(1, 3) // [ 'Feb', '05' ]
            .join(' ');
    }
}

slider.value = initDayOfYear;
onDayOfYearChanged(initDayOfYear);
</script>
#+END_EXPORT

Notice that the values in the above chart depends on two variables:
latitude and day of the year. Time zones are demarcated by longitude,
which is completely irrelevant here. So go ahead, embrace darker
mornings and join a neighboring time zone. But that's (literally)
orthogonal to the problem addressed by seasonal time, so it's not part
of this discussion.

Second, most of our discontent with Daylight Savings is condensed into
two weeks of the year following the start and end of DST. The spring
forward is particularly bad since we lose an hour of sleep. But if we
could magically do away with time changes while keeping the extra
daylight in the evenings, most reasonable people would be satisfied.

Third, even without Daylight Saving Time, time is still
confusing. Imagine that we tossed DST onto history's discard pile of
failed experiments and returned to the days of yore, when the clocks
ticked out a steady and predictable stream of seconds. Then everything
would be simple, right?

Well, except for time zones - our trucks carrying radishes and
gooseberries still time-travel across certain invisible
boundaries.

And oh yeah, every 4th Februrary has an extra day.

Whoops, almost forgot about [[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Leap_second][leap seconds]]! We'll need to add those
whenever some committee in Paris decides that the Earth's rotation has
slowed enough to warrant one. We've had 27 leap seconds since 1972,
and on each day that includes a leap second, at one second before
midnight the clock reads 23:59:60.

Maybe not so simple. In fact, I would argue that it's next to
impossible for anyone to correctly reason about clock time on a
case-by-case basis. This has unsettling implications when you consider
that the software responsible for scheduling flights, administering
the correct dose of anesthetic after your next surgery, and emitting
precisely timed electrical impulses in gramma's pacemaker was written
by some ordinary guy named Doug from Wisconsin. Doug is pretty smart,
but not _that_ smart, and he's probably never heard of a leap second.

Yet we software developers still delude ourselves into thinking that
we understand time and riddle our code with ticking time-bombs (see
what I did there?) which go off every November and March. Every
popular programming language in existence has battle-tested, freely
available libraries for dealing with time. How do we continue to
rationalize the choice not to use them?

I think that it's precisely because the pain only comes twice a
year. Sure, we're signing up for one bad day in March, but then it's
over and done with. We have 6 months to forget that pain and then
we're surprised again in the fall.

If you're a software practicioner you may be getting a sneaking
suspicion as to where this argument is heading. You're right,
sorry. (But now that I have you here, do you have a minute to hear the
Good News about Continuous Integration?)

If you haven't spent time in the software industry during the last
decade, the proposal I'm about to make may sound unintuitive and
ridiculous. Many otherwise intelligent people would agree with you,
but they are wrong. I bring up software because it's what I know, but
I suspect that the application to software is merely one specific
instance of a general truth. Fortunately, you don't have to take it
from me, because I can appeal to an authority who never wrote a line
of code: the inventor of Daylight Saving Time, Mr. William Willett,
himself.

My proposal, which is really just a rehash of one of Willett's
proposals, is this: considering that adjusting the clocks is so
painful, let's stop doing it twice a year; instead let's do it every
day.

Pick an arbitrary time at which you would like the sun to come up -
let's say 5:30 am. That hour is now fixed as the time of sunrise
throughout the summer. During the spring, we'll skip a few seconds
each day such that the sun never rises before 5:30. During the fall,
we'll gradually replace those extra seconds until we're back to the
"real" time.

Maybe it's best explained visually.

Here's the shape of our daylight hours *without* Daylight Saving Time
in Seattle, Washington.

#+BEGIN_EXPORT html
  <img src="../assets/willett-time/standard-daylight-hours.png"/>
#+END_EXPORT

Nice and smooth, but look at all that pre-5 a.m. daylight going to
waste during the middle of the year!

With Daylight Saving Time, we reclaim all of that pre-5 a.m. daylight
by shifting the sunrise up an hour:

#+BEGIN_EXPORT html
  <img src="../assets/willett-time/dst-daylight-hours.png"/>
#+END_EXPORT

Not so smooth anymore, though. See the discontinuities in March and
November? Those correspond to the spring forward and fall back. These
are the Sleepy Death Zones, in which the lucky people get very grouchy
for a few days and the unlucky people get very dead, forever.

The idea behind what I'm calling Willett Time is to push those
daylight hours up towards our normal, waking hours without any abrupt
jumps. Here's how that might look:

#+BEGIN_EXPORT html
  <img src="../assets/willett-time/willet-time-daylight-hours.png"/>
#+END_EXPORT

See how the sunrise curve flattens out at 5:30 am? That daylight isn't
magically disappearing, it's just being tacked on in the evening. The
principle is exactly the same as with our current form of Daylight
Saving Time, only with a more fine-grained adjustment.

You might say that constantly adjusting the clocks is impractical. But
why?

In Willett's day, the hassle of adjusting non-networked, mechanical
clocks limited the frequency of change. But that's no longer a
problem; we don't have to wind our iPhones before we go to sleep on
the night before a time change. Except for the clocks on the microwave
and oven, every clock in my apartment has already adjusted itself by
the time I wake up on the morning following a time change. As long as
my Android displays the same time as your iPhone, who cares if
yesterday was two seconds shorter than today?

Still not convinced? Everyone told Willett that 20 minute time changes
were impractical, too, and his response was cogent: "[T]he more often
you do a thing, the more easily you do it." (TODO: Source?)

Doing dishes isn't fun, but it's much easier to wash a glass as soon
as you finish with it than it is to clean it a week later in an
overflowing sink full of food-encrusted plates. Running a mile can be
unpleasant, but it's especially unpleasant if you only do it once a
year.

Maybe you recognize the advantages, but you think this scheme is just
too complicated. I would argue that the merit of this scheme is
precisely that it's not easy. This way, we'll be forced to stop
treating the calculation of time as an afterthough and start relying
on reference implementations.

Situations that call for a precise and unambiguous specification time
will continue to use UTC, which they should already be doing
anyway. References to time in the context of our daily schedules can
use Willett Time. This system simply forces us to be explicit about a
distinction that already exists.

For example, you meet your friend for coffee at 10 a.m., Willett Time;
your meeting with your coworkers in Boston starts at 10:00 UTC. TODO:
Explain what UTC is.

Happy Hour starts at 4 p.m. Willett Time; your plane boards at 16:00
UTC.

Before you argue that adopting this change would be too costly,
consider that this argument cuts both ways: modifying Daylight Saving
Time would absolutely be expensive, but so is inaction. The economic
cost of our current implementation is staggering, and that's setting
aside the cost in human lives. Even if you are among those who believe
DST saves lives on aggregate, you have to admit that the ideal number
of DST-related fatalities is 0.

Maybe you're unconvinced, and think that we should just abolish DST
forever. This too would come at a hefty price. Though we still have
difficulty with the time adjustments, we've been doing it long enough
that we *mostly* have it figured out. At this point, *not* changing
the time twice a year would likely cause even more problems!
Admittedly, the abolition of seasonal time would incur a one-time
cost, but the undeniable benefits of seasonal time would be lost
forever.

The irony of my proposing this scheme is not lost on me. A few
paragraphs ago I painted Willett as leading an irresponsible crusade
which is still wreaking havoc more than a century later and a
continent away. Now in the very same, much too-long, blog post, I am
indeed suggesting a similar campaign. It appears that my hypocrisy
knows no bounds.

But you won't find me in the Letters to the Editor section or golfing
with my congressperson. I'm alternately frustrated and fascinated with
the Willetts of the world, but I'm not that type.

Me, I aspire to be a Hudson. He may have been a total failure as head
of the movement for seasonal time, but he was busy with other things,
such as painting over 3500 bugs. If you've gotten nothing else out of
this post, I urge you to salvage this experience by checking out
George Vernon Hudson's bug portraits. They are in the public domain,
and every one of them is painfully beautiful. [[https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/e/e9/New_Zealand_Moths_and_Butterflies_(1898)_06.jpg][Here's one]] from _New
Zealand Moths and Butterflies_ which was published in 1898, the same
year that he spoke before the Wellington Philosophical Society.

Like Hudson, I now abandon a brief and ineffective campaign for
seasonal time in favor of my bugs. Specifically, the ones in this
Github repository [TODO: link], which includes the code behind the
clock at the top of this page (make sure you have JavaScript
enabled). The clock shows the current Willett Time in Pett's Wood. Feel
free to send a pull request if you find a mistake.

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
Reading the debates which took place in Parliament on daylight saving
in 1908, 1909, and 1911, one marvels that so feeble a case should have
been sustained so long, and that a measure whose effect has been to
enlarge the opportunities for the pursuit of health and happiness
among the millions of people who live in this country should have met
with so frigid a reception. Let us, then, as we put forward our clocks
for another summer, drink a silent toast to the memory of William
Willett, who spared neither labour nor money over a long period of his
life in his advocacy of this great reform. He did not live to see
success crown his unselfish efforts; he died in 1915, a year before
the passing of the wartime Act. But he has the monument he would have
wished in the thousands of playing-fields crowded with eager young
people every fine evening throughout the summer and one of the finest
epitaphs that any man could win: He gave more light to his countrymen.

-- Winston Churchill, A Silent Toast to William Willett [fn:37]
#+END_QUOTE

* References                                                       :noexport:

TODO: At some point the numbering got off, and I still haven't fixed it.

[1] http://rsnz.natlib.govt.nz/volume/rsnz_76/rsnz_76_02_003130.html
[2] http://rsnz.natlib.govt.nz/volume/rsnz_31/rsnz_31_00_008570.html
[3] http://rsnz.natlib.govt.nz/volume/rsnz_28/rsnz_28_00_006110.html
[4] http://www.webexhibits.org/daylightsaving/willett.html
[5] https://books.google.com/books/content?id=gm0_AQAAIAAJ&pg=PA458&img=1&zoom=3&hl=en&sig=ACfU3U04g2hBFZKEzVqGROXdOBWQZYkDow&ci=9,12,926,1495&edge=0
[7] https://books.google.com/books?id=soY-AQAAMAAJ&lpg=PR940&ots=C017ukhBBv&dq=%22no%20intention%20of%20giving%20facilities%20for%20the%20passing%20of%20the%20Daylight%20Saving%20Bill%22&pg=PR941#v=onepage&q=%22no%20intention%20of%20giving%20facilities%20for%20the%20passing%20of%20the%20Daylight%20Saving%20Bill%22&f=false
[8] http://hansard.millbanksystems.com/commons/1909/mar/05/daylight-saving-bill
[9] https://martinfowler.com/bliki/FrequencyReducesDifficulty.html
[10] https://www.slideshare.net/beamrider9/continuous-deployment-at-etsy-a-tale-of-two-approaches/35?src=clipshare
[11] https://books.google.com/books?id=tWNYAAAAYAAJ&pg=PR1#v=onepage&q&f=false
[12] http://www.historytoday.com/oliver-b-pollack/daylight-savings-time-movement
[13] https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Battle_of_the_Somme
[14] https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Iraq_War#Casualty_estimates
[15] https://books.google.com/books?id=VCtRAgAAQBAJ&lpg=PT277&dq=The%20Home%20Front%201914%E2%80%931918%3A%20How%20Britain%20Survived%20the%20Great%20War&pg=PT272#v=onepage&q=rationing&f=false
[16] https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Economic_history_of_World_War_I#cite_note-13
[17] http://app.leg.wa.gov/billsummary?BillNumber=5329&Year=2017
[18] https://www.timeanddate.com/news/time/usa-states-no-dst.html
[19] https://www.aeaweb.org/articles?id=10.1257/app.20140100
[20] http://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJMc0807104
[21] http://www.academia.edu/30442853/Sleepy_Punishers_Are_Harsh_Punishers_Daylight_Saving_Time_and_Legal_Sentences
[22] http://www.apa.org/pubs/journals/releases/apl9451317.pdf
[23] https://sleepbetter.org/Lost-Hour-Economic-Index/
[24] http://haas.berkeley.edu/faculty/papers/anderson/status%20enhancement%20account%20of%20overconfidence.pdf
[25] http://www.winstonchurchill.org/publications/finest-hour/finest-hour-114/a-silent-toast-to-william-willett-by-winston-s-churchill
[26] [[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Triple_Alliance_(1882)#Austria-Hungary][https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Triple_Alliance_(1882)#Austria-Hungary]]
[27] https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Imperial_German_Navy#1906_to_1908.2C_The_Dreadnought_and_innovation:_First_Novelle
[28] https://www.eia.gov/dnav/pet/hist/LeafHandler.ashx?n=PET&s=EMM_EPMR_PTE_NUS_DPG&f=M
[29] https://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/BILLS-109hr6enr/pdf/BILLS-109hr6enr.pdf
[30] https://newrepublic.com/article/79023/roll-back-the-bush-changes-daylight-saving-time
[31] http://www.nber.org/papers/w14429.pdf

* Appendix
** How long could you power an NFL stadium with the energy from the extra fries sold at Hardee's following start of DST?

#+BEGIN_SRC python :results output :exports both
avg_sales_increase_dollars = 880 # http://commdocs.house.gov/committees/science/hsy73325.000/hsy73325_0.HTM#0
burger_combo_price_dollars = 7.09 # http://www.fastfoodmenuprices.com/hardees-carls-jr-prices/
num_locations = 5812 # https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hardees
med_fry_grams = 132.0 # http://www.myfitnesspal.com/food/calories/369125865
kcal_per_fries = 410 # http://www.myfitnesspal.com/food/calories/369125865
avg_russet_grams = 155.0 # https://cooking.stackexchange.com/questions/10413/how-much-does-a-large-potato-weigh
nfl_stadium_mw = 10 # http://oilprice.com/Energy/Energy-General/How-Much-Energy-Does-the-Super-Bowl-Use.html

total_extra_fries_sold = (avg_sales_increase_dollars / burger_combo_price_dollars) * num_locations
total_extra_potatoes = total_extra_fries_sold * (med_fry_grams / avg_russet_grams)
total_extra_kcal = total_extra_fries_sold * kcal_per_fries
fry_mwh = total_extra_kcal / 859845.22785899
nfl_stadium_hours = fry_mwh / nfl_stadium_mw

print "Hardee's DST fries sold: {}".format(total_extra_fries_sold)
print "Potatoes required for Hardee's DST fries: {}".format(total_extra_potatoes)
print "Kilocalories from Hardee's DST fries: {}".format(total_extra_kcal)
print "Megawatt-hours from Hardee's DST fries: {}".format(fry_mwh)
print "Hours an NFL stadium could be powered by Hardee's DST fries: {}".format(nfl_stadium_hours)
#+END_SRC

#+RESULTS:
: Hardee's DST fries sold: 721376.586742
: Potatoes required for Hardee's DST fries: 614333.609354
: Kilocalories from Hardee's DST fries: 295764400.564
: Megawatt-hours from Hardee's DST fries: 343.973997856
: Hours an NFL stadium could be powered by Hardee's DST fries: 34.3973997856

* Holding Area                                                     :noexport:

TODO: Willett recognized leverage points; he sought to influence public
opinion, but he also made more targeted appeals to politicians.

Humans set not only the goals of the system, but the mindset out of
which the system arises. The paradigm of the system is the point of
greatest leverage, the lever which can move any of the various
parameters, rules, or goals of the system. Change the paradigm and
everything else will follow.

"Move fast and break things" is a paradigm. That paradigm is why
Facebook and NASA are very different organizations.

Willett's "ideal" scheme is totally practical now. It would be
trivially easy to build a clock that adds a few seconds every day in
the spring and takes a few a way in the fall. People would say that
this will wreak havoc in the software world. But I argue it would be
better. Every major language has a time library. People get hit with
the same Daylight Saving bugs every spring and fall because they'd
rather roll their own, naïve, timekeeping logic and deal with the
fallout twice a year than sit down and read the docs of a proper
date-time library.

What about high-precision, scientific software? Can it continue to use
UTC?

What about scheduling software? Calendar applications and dentist
appointment schedulers and such?

[TODO: Move this?]

Part of what draws me to this story is the contrast between its two
protagonists. Hudson and Willett are perfect foils for each other:
Hudson, a naturalist chasing butterflies in a remote corner of the
world stage; Willett, the successful businessman living in the heart of
the British empire.

I wonder if their dissimilar backgrounds led them to the same idea.

GVH's environs must have fostered a detachment from society. From the
island wilderness in the South Pacific, he would have viewed the world
through a different lens than a typical resident of London.

Decades of running a business in a compliance-heavy industry must have
provided Willett with an education in the art of navigating regulations
and influencing society's rulemakers.

Accordingly, what most people took for an immutable law of the
universe, both the businessman and the naturalist recognized as an
artificial construct. The time on the clock is a shared agreement, and
it was open for negotiation.



Highways didn't even exist in 1908. Besides, Willett _warned_ everyone
_repeatedly_ that the human body wouldn't adjust well to the loss of a
full hour of sleep, but we ignored him and opted for a 1-hour clock
adjustment anyway.

[TODO: Hubris. On the other hand, isn't it irresponsible not to
intervene, if the imperfect information you have suggests you'll be
saving lives, on aggregate?]


Willett couldn't possibly have anticipated the effects of DST on modern
society. How broke does it need to be before "If it ain't broke don't
fix it," no longer applies? And if it's time for a change, can we draw
on any lessons from the first time around?

We've already had a paradigm shift - the rise of massive, networked
computers. Now we're laboring under a curse of complexity. Until we
can fix software, we probably can't fix DST. Continous integration to
the rescue?


* Notes                                                            :noexport:
** George Vernon Hudson
- Patient, meticulous, painted 3500+ portraits of insects. Wrote and
  illustrated 7 books of insects. ([[http://rsnz.natlib.govt.nz/volume/rsnz_76/rsnz_76_02_003130.html][Source]] and [[http://www.friendswbg.org.nz/newhudsonbiographical.html][this one]])
- Found a bunch of shipwrecked people on an Arctic expedition
- Lived to see DST implemented
- 1893 - married a high-school teacher ([[http://rsnz.natlib.govt.nz/volume/rsnz_76/rsnz_76_02_003130.html][Source]])
- Whole family went on bug-hunting expeditions. Recorded the weather
  every day. Thought the educational system stifled creativity, so he
  ran his own field trips. Invited kids over for bug-hunting
  expeditions followed by ginger beer and cookies from the biscuit
  barrel. ([[http://www.friendswbg.org.nz/newhudsonbiographical.html][Source]])


** [[http://rsnz.natlib.govt.nz/volume/rsnz_28/rsnz_28_00_006110.html][First Proposal]] - 1895

Pretty much everyone ridiculed it, the reactions were great. Despite
cold reception, many in Christ-church liked it and agitated for it's
adoption. Note that his proposal has two striking differences from the
modern implementation:

1. Spring back, fall forward (b/c Southern hemisphere)
2. 2 hours difference instead of 1.

** [[http://rsnz.natlib.govt.nz/volume/rsnz_31/rsnz_31_00_008570.html][Second Proposal]] - 1898

Good quotes:

- "It cannot be too strongly borne in mind that the time standard in
  ordinary use—i.e., the mean solar day—is merely an abstraction
  devised for human convenience, and does not represent any actual
  time interval existing in nature... The above facts are no doubt
  very familiar to many members, but, as most of the objections which
  have been urged against my system of seasonal time depend on the
  assumption that the ordinary time we employ is an
  unchangeable-actuality existing in nature with which we must not and
  cannot in any way interfere, it has been specially necessary to
  emphasize the fact that our time is merely an artificial standard,
  which might be further adjusted if by so doing it could be made more
  subservient to our requirements." ([[http://rsnz.natlib.govt.nz/volume/rsnz_31/rsnz_31_00_008570.html][Source]]). Contrast to "the mere
  calling the hours different would not make any difference in the
  time" (Mr. Maskell, from above)
- "...I think it will be agreed that my proposed adjustment of
  two-hours is not likely to cause any very great amount of
  inconvenience." ([[http://rsnz.natlib.govt.nz/volume/rsnz_31/rsnz_31_00_008570.html][Source]]) Spoken like a man who's never had to deal
  with a date time library.
- "By it all outdoor sports and pastimes would receive a great
  impetus—the man of business, for instance, who leaves his work at 5
  o'clock would in midsummer have five hours of continuous daylight
  available, during which he would be at liberty to follow any of the
  numerous outdoor pursuits, which are so essential to the health and
  happiness of those whose bread-winning occupation obliges them to
  remain indoors during the major part of the day." ([[http://rsnz.natlib.govt.nz/volume/rsnz_31/rsnz_31_00_008570.html][Source]])


** Railroads
Railroads had already shattered notion of "God's time" as sacred
through the introduction of time zones. Adoption was organic. (Source: book)

** [[https://www.jstor.org/stable/pdf/3288163.pdf][Time keeping in Rome]]

The period of daylight was divided into 12 "hours". Thus, the hours
floated in accordance with the season, naturally accounting for
daylight savings time. The obvious disadvantage is that each "hour"
was shorter during winter, so any more granular quantum of time such
as seconds or minutes.

** Willett

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
  I am sorry, however, that after making reference to the Daylight
  Saving Bill you should add: "We are not sanguine of its success." Are
  these words quite worthy of the _Spectator_? ... [I]t is clear that we
  have passed the Slough of Despond. We are now climbing the Hill
  Difficulty. The Palace Beautiful awaits us at the top. Mistrust and
  Timorous will never reach it! Surely the "Great Heart" of the
  _Spectator_ should encourage pilgrims to climb the Hill, and should
  use every weapon he can against any Grims that may bar the way or any
  lions that may appear to forbid the happy arrival of the Bill before
  his Majesty the King. What is there to fear?
#+END_QUOTE

([[https://books.google.com/books/content?id=gm0_AQAAIAAJ&pg=PA458&img=1&zoom=3&hl=en&sig=ACfU3U04g2hBFZKEzVqGROXdOBWQZYkDow&ci=9%252C12%252C926%252C1495&edge=0][Source]])

Fear-mongering anticipated war:

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
  The benefits afforded by parks and open spaces will be doubled, and
  the nation may some day have cause to be thankful that by this means
  opportunities for rifle practice will have been created, which under
  existing conditions cannot be contemplated.
#+END_QUOTE

Problems of scale:

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
  One of the most powerful attractions of this scheme is that with one
  exception all trains will run in accordance with existing time
  tables. That is to say -- every train which now starts at 8 a.m. will
  continue to start at 8 a.m., the 9 a.m. at 9 a.m., and so on; there
  will be no alteration.

  On Sunday at 2 a.m., the hour at which the hands of official clocks
  will be advanced, very few trains are running. Such as are then
  running will merely arrive 20 minutes late on four Sunday mornings in
  April only and this will be known to both passengers and officials
  before each journey is commenced.
#+END_QUOTE

Waxing philosophical on light:

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
  Light is one of the great gifts of the Creator. While daylight
  surrounds us, cheerfulness reigns, anxieties press less heavily, and
  courage is bred for the struggle of life. Against our ever-besieging
  enemy, disease, light and fresh air act as guards in our defence, and
  when the conflict is close, supply us with most effective weapons with
  which to overcome the invader. Even the blind keenly realise the
  difference between daylight and darkness. They are always cheered by
  the former, but depressed by the latter.
#+END_QUOTE

Let's just try a 6-month experiment... Tim Ferriss' puppy dog
sell. Echoed by Churchill in his speech (TODO: Look up).

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
  Let us not be so faint-hearted as to hesitate to make the effort when
  the cost is to trifling and the reward so great. If any better method
  than that I have suggested can be devised let it be produced, but
  somehow or other let us secure these 210 hours. To obtain them
  everyone who wants them must do something. Out of nothing nothing
  comes. Let every man and woman, and every youth in particular, see to
  it that every voter who is willing that the scheme should be tried for
  six months communicates his wish to his Member of Parliament. This may
  be done by means of a postcard, giving the name, address and
  qualification of the voter. If postcards are sent in considerable
  numbers, there ought to be no insuperable difficulty in obtaining an
  Act for six months' experiment to be made.
#+END_QUOTE

On whether the bill should expire after a year.

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
  Yes, but then you immediately impart an element of doubt, and you
  cannot expect the House of Commons, I should think, to justify a Bill
  at all with an element of doubt in it. I hope that this Committee will
  be unanimous, by the time we have finished, that it will be a good
  thing."
#+END_QUOTE
([[https://books.google.com/books?id=tWNYAAAAYAAJ&lpg=PR16&dq=conan%2520doyle%2520william%2520willett&pg=PA7#v=onepage&q=conan%2520doyle%2520william%2520willett&f=false][Source]])

Why not a 1-hour change? See page 10 of his pamphlet.

- [[https://books.google.com/books?id=2FkxAQAAMAAJ&lpg=PA113&ots=VJ98kCUjnc&dq=full%2520text%2520daylight%2520savings%2520bill%25201908&pg=PA113#v=onepage&q=full%2520text%2520daylight%2520savings%2520bill%25201908&f=false][Story about practical joker setting the clocks ahead]]


Mounted a more vigorous campaign than Hudson. Enlisted politicians,
businessmen, and even sought out farmers to sway the opposition. His
booklet went through 18(?) revisions, brought before Parliament 6(?)
times before it was rejected.

It finally passed with a lack of ceremony that belied its contentious
history. Germany did it soon after the war began, enacting DST along
with rules that allowed seizure of assets and rationing. DST looks
reasonable in contrast with forfeiture and rationing.

Factors:

1. Crisis + FOMO (the Enemy did it first)
2. Framing (DST vs. asset forfeiture and rationing)
3. The economy's outputs changed: munitions vs. finance,
   textiles. Process change introduces new bottleneck. Fear over
   munitions production rates increased the perceived value of energy
   saving measures.

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
  The annual output of artillery grew from 91 guns in 1914 to 8039 in
  1918. Warplanes soared from 200 in 1914 to 3200 in 1918, while the
  production of machine guns went from 300 to 121,000)
#+END_QUOTE

([[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Economic_history_of_World_War_I#British_Empire][Source]])

The new demands of the wartime economy also drove another significant
social change: the introduction of women into the workforce. ([[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Economic_history_of_World_War_I#cite_note-13][Source]])

** TODO Supporters


1. Churchill - look up his quote about the "extra snooze"
2. Conan-Doyle

*** Churchill

**** A silent toast to William Willett

#+BEGIN_EXAMPLE
  Reading the debates which took place in Parliament on daylight saving
  in 1908, 1909, and 1911, one marvels that so feeble a case should have
  been sustained so long, and that a measure whose effect has been to
  enlarge the opportunities for the pursuit of health and happiness
  among the millions of people who live in this country should have met
  with so frigid a reception. Let us, then, as we put forward our clocks
  for another summer, drink a silent toast to the memory of William
  Willett, who spared neither labour nor money over a long period of his
  life in his advocacy of this great reform. He did not live to see
  success crown his unselfish efforts; he died in 1915, a year before
  the passing of the wartime Act. But he has the monument he would have
  wished in the thousands of playing-fields crowded with eager young
  people every fine evening throughout the summer and one of the finest
  epitaphs that any man could win: He gave more light to his countrymen.
#+END_QUOTE

*** Conan Doyle

[[https://books.google.com/books?id=tWNYAAAAYAAJ&lpg=PR16&ots=eT6xGQw1bL&dq=conan%2520doyle%2520william%2520willett&pg=PA116#v=onepage&q=conan%2520doyle%2520william%2520willett&f=false][Report And Special Report From the Select Comittee on the Daylight
Savings Bill (1908)]] - p.1, p. 116

** Overview: Path to passage

Good timeline and quotes from Churchill, too.
http://www.historytoday.com/oliver-b-pollack/daylight-savings-time-movement

Asquith in 1908: the government had "no intention of giving facilities
for the passing of the Daylight Savings Bill." Asquith was Prime
Minister. His opposition effectively killed the bill before it made it
to a vote in the House of Commons.

1909 committee: "Willett was given an opportunity to testify. Despite
the Chairman's request that he be brief and Sir Ivor Herbert's efforts
to cut him off, Willett's testimony occupies thirty-three pages."

The 1909 Committee generally conceded the apparent benefits cited by
the 1908 Committee. However, because of substantial diversity over the
manner of legislating and the serious inconvenience to important
interests, they concluded 'Your Committee recommended that the Bill be
not further proceeded with'.

Daylight Savings was presented as a private bill in 1911, 1912, 1913
and 1914 The Government refused the Bill its assistance. Willett
continued to obtain signatures for his petitions.

At the very time the Frankfurter Zeitung was noting scornfully that,
despite its long Daylight Savings campaign, 'it is characteristic of
England that she could not rouse herself to a decision', the War
Cabinet met. Asquith at last gave the Bill Government time.

He estimated this act of 'imperative patriotism' would save 2,500,000
pounds. Joining the usual popular forces Willett had formerly
marshalled in support of the Bill were now the influential Central
Committee for the Disposal of Coal and the (General Conference of
Railway Managers. Norman's only regret was that 'unhappily our enemies
have been quicker than ourselves to realise the greater economy
afforded'.

The vote was taken at 7.27 p.m.; 170 ayes, 2 noes.

** [[http://haas.berkeley.edu/faculty/papers/anderson/status%2520enhancement%2520account%2520of%2520overconfidence.pdf][Overconfidence]]

#+BEGIN_EXAMPLE
  overconfidence also predicted the grade that teammates assigned to the
  individual, suggesting that overconfident individuals not only
  attained higher status but were also assigned higher grades by peers.
  (Study 2)
#+END_QUOTE


#+BEGIN_EXAMPLE
  overconfident individuals attained higher status because they were
  perceived by others to be competent, even when the impression was
  artifice
#+END_QUOTE


#+BEGIN_EXAMPLE
  Overconfident individuals behaved in ways that conveyed competence
  more convincingly than did individuals who are actually competent.
#+END_QUOTE


#+BEGIN_EXAMPLE
  humans might have the tendency to form false self beliefs because
  doing so helps convince others of their positive value.
#+END_QUOTE


#+BEGIN_EXAMPLE
  When will overconfidence lead to social benefits such as the ones we
  observed and when will it not?
#+END_QUOTE


#+BEGIN_EXAMPLE
  Those individuals among us who are elevated to positions of status
  wield undue influence, have access to more resources, get better
  information, and enjoy a variety of benefits. One of the most basic

  societies, is the question of how we select individuals for positions
  of status. Although we may seek to choose wisely, we are often forced
  to rely on proxies for ability, such as individuals’ confidence.  In
  so doing, we, as a society, create incentives for those who would seek
  status to display more confidence than their actual ability merits.
#+END_QUOTE

** [[https://www1.eere.energy.gov/ba/pba/pdfs/epact_sec_110_edst_report_to_congress_2008.pdf][Department of Energy Study]]

- 17% risk of dying in a car crash - Source: http://www.mcmaster.ca/inabis98/occupational/coren0164/
- Americans sleep 40 minutes less on the night of spring
  forward. Probability of workplace injury increases by 5.7% - Source:
  http://www.apa.org/pubs/journals/releases/apl9451317.pdf
- Sleep duration decreases 1 hour, efficiency by 10% - Source:
  http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0304394006007038
- 3-5% more likely to have a heart attack in the 3 days following
  spring forward - Source: http://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJMc0807104
- Judges issue 5% longer criminal sentences on the Monday following a
  spring forward - Source: http://www.academia.edu/30442853/Sleepy_Punishers_Are_Harsh_Punishers_Daylight_Saving_Time_and_Legal_Sentences
- Congressional testimony, Idaho farmer's in support after Hardee's
  sales go up $880 per week:
  http://commdocs.house.gov/committees/science/hsy73325.000/hsy73325_0.HTM#0
- "Remember, the naming of the hours is an invention of man, and those
  names must convey meaning to different audiences for different
  purposes. Voluntary Standard Railway time went into effect in North America on
  November 18, 1883 to simplify railway schedules not only for the
  traveling public, but for the safe and efficient use of railroad
  tracks." - http://commdocs.house.gov/committees/science/hsy73325.000/hsy73325_0.HTM#0

#+BEGIN_EXAMPLE
"You're going to have such great health care at a tiny fraction of the cost. And it's going to be so easy."
- U.S. presidential candidate Donald Trump, Oct. 25, 2016
#+END_QUOTE
[[http://abcnews.go.com/Politics/fact-checking-trumps-repeal-replace-obamacare-timeline/story?id=46360908][Source]]


#+BEGIN_EXAMPLE
  New systems continue to fall victim to old and well-known problems.

  You might think that the leap-day problems would be anticipated
  adequately by now. Getting clock arithmetic correct might seem to be a
  conceptually simple task -- which is perhaps why it is not taken
  seriously enough. But even if earlier leap-year problems were caught
  in older systems, they continue to recur in newer systems. So, every 4
  years, we encounter new problems, giving us 4 more years to develop
  new software with old leap-year bugs, and perhaps even to find some
  creative new bugs!"
  - http://www.csl.sri.com/users/neumann/cal.html#DatesTimes
#+END_QUOTE


#+BEGIN_EXAMPLE
  If you are going to change the clocks, this is a huge
  country. Somewhere it is going to be dark in the morning when it would
  have been light, and somewhere a reporter is going to take a camera
  and take a picture of a victim and say that victim would not have been
  hurt if only you hadn't changed the clocks, and that is a story. You
  may have 50 or 100 traffic accidents that didn't happen that evening
  because it was still light while people were going home. You may have
  50 robberies, rapes, burglaries that don't occur at 8 p.m. that
  evening. But how do you take a picture of the traffic accident that
  didn't occur?
  - http://commdocs.house.gov/committees/science/hsy73325.000/hsy73325_0.HTM#0
#+END_QUOTE


#+BEGIN_EXAMPLE
  I ran a dairy so I know about dairy, and none of the cows that I had
  could read a clock. So I am not sure why the dairyman is changing his
  hours at all. - http://commdocs.house.gov/committees/science/hsy73325.000/hsy73325_0.HTM#0
#+END_QUOTE

Daylight Saving Time: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Daylight_saving_time#/media/File:Greenwich_GB_DaylightChart.png
Make a corresponding continuous chart


** TODO Before publication

*** Prose
**** Must
1. [ ] Fix transition to redemption for Willett
2. [ ] Elaborate on time zones vs. time as a function of latitude
3. [ ] Add graphs to page
4. [ ] Fix ordering of references, dedupe
**** Maybe
1. [ ] Include derivations of sunset in Appendix?
*** Code
**** Must
1. [X] Use doy instead of days past solstice in "client" logic
2. [X] Add date to slider
3. [X] Incorporate globe graph
4. [X] Fix clock (use onLoad() callback)
5. [ ] Final cleanup pass, push to Github
**** Maybe
1. [ ] Stop hard-coding width and height of svg's
2. [ ] Add second set of hands to clock face
3. [ ] Use cljs-time instead of goog.date
4. [ ] Add offset from Willett Time to globe graph
5. [ ] Animate butterfly catchers on clock

   
** Outline

*** GVH
- Good idea, never gained momentum

*** Willett
- Good idea, uber confident
- Determination and force of personality nearly pushed it through, but
  still died a failure

*** Total War
- Suddenly, success, because the goals of the system changed
- Crisis as opportunity for change

*** Belief vs. arrogance
- Contrast: GVH and Willett
- Willett's secret weapon: belief
- Why so confident? Justified?
- Still died a failure

*** Willett's Legacy
- Still using DST to address crisis
- DST is terrible
- Before we judge Willett too harshly, let's look at the
  implementation...

*** Look to the future
- DST is a good idea, implemented poorly
- Ironically, the technological advances that make improvement
  possible also create a new obstacle (networks -> increased
  coordination)
  - Coordination was only just starting to be a problem (astronomical
    measurements, markets in New York)
  - Now it's a bigger problem

* Footnotes


[fn:1] http://rsnz.natlib.govt.nz/volume/rsnz_76/rsnz_76_02_003130.html
[fn:2] http://rsnz.natlib.govt.nz/volume/rsnz_31/rsnz_31_00_008570.html
[fn:3] http://rsnz.natlib.govt.nz/volume/rsnz_28/rsnz_28_00_006110.html
[fn:4] https://books.google.com/books/content?id=G2RRAQAAIAAJ&pg=PA719&img=1&zoom=3&hl=en&sig=ACfU3U3gPNWQcEgGw0T6Rv7mDRLGa6e_0w&ci=50%2C412%2C819%2C543&edge=0
[fn:5] http://www.webexhibits.org/daylightsaving/willett.html
[fn:6] https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anglo-German_naval_arms_race
[fn:7] https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bosnian_crisis
[fn:8] https://books.google.com/books/content?id=gm0_AQAAIAAJ&pg=PA458&img=1&zoom=3&hl=en&sig=ACfU3U04g2hBFZKEzVqGROXdOBWQZYkDow&ci=9,12,926,1495&edge=0
[fn:9] https://books.google.com/books?id=tWNYAAAAYAAJ&dq=inauthor%3A%22Great%20Britain.%20Daylight%20Saving%20Bill%20Committee%22&pg=PR1#v=onepage&q&f=false
[fn:10] https://books.google.com/books?id=gTEPAQAAIAAJ&lpg=PR722&ots=nVj0HXH5X1&pg=PR723#v=onepage&q&f=false
[fn:11] https://books.google.com/books?id=soY-AQAAMAAJ&pg=PR940#v=onepage&q&f=false
[fn:12] http://hansard.millbanksystems.com/commons/1909/mar/05/daylight-saving-bill#column_1778
[fn:13] https://books.google.com/books?id=tWNYAAAAYAAJ&pg=RA1-PA92#v=onepage&q&f=false
[fn:14] https://books.google.com/books?id=tWNYAAAAYAAJ&pg=RA1-PR14#v=onepage&q&f=false
[fn:15] https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Daylight_saving_time#Politics
[fn:16] https://www.staff.science.uu.nl/~gent0113/wettijd/downloads/willett.pdf
[fn:17] http://www.firstworldwar.com/atoz/shellscandal.htm
[fn:18] https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Battle_of_the_Somme
[fn:19] https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Iraq_War#Casualty_estimates
[fn:20] http://donellameadows.org/archives/leverage-points-places-to-intervene-in-a-system/#two
[fn:21] https://www.eia.gov/dnav/pet/hist/LeafHandler.ashx?n=PET&s=EMM_EPMR_PTE_NUS_DPG&f=M
[fn:22] https://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/BILLS-109hr6enr/pdf/BILLS-109hr6enr.pdf
[fn:23] https://newrepublic.com/article/79023/roll-back-the-bush-changes-daylight-saving-time
[fn:24] https://energy.gov/sites/prod/files/2015/05/f22/epact_sec_110_edst_report_to_congress_2008.pdf
[fn:25] http://www.nber.org/papers/w14429.pdf
[fn:26] https://www.aeaweb.org/articles?id=10.1257/app.20140100
[fn:27] http://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJMc0807104
[fn:28] http://www.academia.edu/30442853/Sleepy_Punishers_Are_Harsh_Punishers_Daylight_Saving_Time_and_Legal_Sentences
[fn:29] http://www.apa.org/pubs/journals/releases/apl9451317.pdf
[fn:30] https://sleepbetter.org/Lost-Hour-Economic-Index/
[fn:31] http://app.leg.wa.gov/billsummary?BillNumber=5329&Year=2017
[fn:32] https://www.timeanddate.com/news/time/usa-states-no-dst.html
[fn:33] http://haas.berkeley.edu/faculty/papers/anderson/status%20enhancement%20account%20of%20overconfidence.pdf
[fn:34] https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3117904/
[fn:35] https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Robert_Cialdini#Six_key_principles
[fn:36] https://books.google.com/books?id=VCtRAgAAQBAJ&lpg=PT277&dq=The%20Home%20Front%201914%E2%80%931918%3A%20How%20Britain%20Survived%20the%20Great%20War&pg=PT135#v=onepage&q&f=false
[fn:37] http://www.winstonchurchill.org/publications/finest-hour/finest-hour-114/a-silent-toast-to-william-willett-by-winston-s-churchill
